[AIP-162] Resource revisions (#298)
googleapis/aip: aip/0162.md

---
aip:
  id: 162
  state: draft
  created: 2019-09-17
permalink: /162
redirect_from:
  - /0162
---

# Resource Revisions

Some APIs need to have resources with a revision history, where users can
reason about the state of the resource over time. There are several reasons for
this:

- Users may want to be able to roll back to a previous revision, or diff
  against a previous revision.
- An API may create data which is derived in some way from a resource at a
  given point in time. In these cases, it may be desirable to snapshot the
  resource for reference later.

## Guidance

APIs **may** store a revision history for a resource if it is useful to users.

APIs implementing resources with a revision history **must** provide a
`revision_id` field on the resource:

```proto
message Book {
  // The name of the book.
  string name = 1;

  // Other fields…

  // The revision ID of the book.

>   // This is automatically changed whenever the contents of the book

Reviewer: It is optional for the revision_id to change whenever any content of the resource changes? E.g. We would like to have a new Model version when it's ML insides got updated, but not when user e.g. added a new label for the current version.

Reviewer: I saw below "field must document when new revisions are created", so I understand that the rules may be as we will need it, therefore this comment is taken care of.

>   // This is automatically changed whenever the contents of the book

Author: ```suggestion
  // A new revision is created whenever the contents of the book
```

Author: Revised out-of-band.

  // change in any way.

>   string revision_id = 5 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];

Author: ```suggestion
  string revision_id = 5 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = IMMUTABLE,
    (google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];
```

>   string revision_id = 99 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];

Reviewer 2: I think the implication here is that this 99 is somehow special (like it must be last). Can we make it like 5? or something less likely to be misread?

Author: ```suggestion
  string revision_id = 5 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];
```

}
```

> - The `revision_id` field **should** be a string and contain a short,

Author: There are two alternatives:

- An auto-incrementing counter (1, 2, 3...)
- Dates

Ultimately, I think an unordered hash string is probably the wisest course, but that is definitely up for debate. Having worked with revision control systems that use both methods, hashes provide the most flexibility, especially if an API has a situation where history needs to be mutable (e.g. delete a revision that is no longer needed), and that has come up in several cases.

Reviewer 2: Use cases I'm concerned about:

- Pinpoint a specific revision
- Revert to the previous revision
- See history and bi-sect search to find the version where the problem was introduced

The first seems reasonably covered here. But the ordered aspects are missing. We'd need to have some better way of chronologically ordering the revisions and browsing those revisions over time. Is that intended to be List()?

Author: Yeah, the intent is that you get the chronologically-ordered list with `ListBookRevisions`.

Author: The AutoML team adds a third alternative: semantic versioning.

I find this alternative silly -- unless the service can determine compatibility between resource B and resource A (which seems vanishingly unlikely), semver is meaningless. This feels like a footgun to me.

Reviewer: In general we would like to propose allowing API writers to decide the format of the versions, there are many version schemes in the wild, and at least some of them have reasonable use-cases.

E.g. in AutoML for versioning Models, we would probably let users  pick if they want versions of given Model to be generated by our infra (probably default), or should it be a string that the user has to populate each time themselves. This way user's that need semantic versioning could effectively represent it. Otherwise, the users would use some labels on Model to do the same thing, but I think that's uglier and annoying to the user.

Author: Discussed in-person:
@jgeewax and I want to make sure we do not boil the ocean, and we are not confident that this use case applies outside AutoML. We think it is probably fine for AutoML to do it but we do not want to specify it as a general pattern. @rsurowka has agreed with this in principle.

Author: @jgeewax and I agree that git-style hashes are preferable over auto-incermenting IDs or dates.

  automatically-generated hash. A good rule of thumb is the last eight
  characters of a UUID4.

> - The field **must** document when new revisions are created.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add an example "(e.g., if ArchiveBook creates a new book revision, that must be stated in the ArchiveBook documentation)"

Reviewer: Would there be an option that e.g.

CreateModel()  creates a totally new model when no name is provided to it as argument, while if a name is provided it would just create a new version of an existing model? Or would you say it would be better to have 2 methods instead, e.g. CreateModel() and CreateModelVersion() (I don't like this option too much).

Author: @jgeewax and @rsurowka and I discussed this in person, and we agreed:

- Definitely do not overload `CreateModel`.
- We think that due to varying use cases in APIs that we should be flexible in how APIs create revisions so long as it is clearly documented. In AutoML's case, we probably think that `CreateModelRevision` is the sensible default, but `ReplaceModel` may also make sense.
  - Note: A more explicit approach is likely more future-proof, so we should probably use that as the sensible default.

### Referencing revisions

When it is necessary to refer to a specific revision of a resource, APIs
**must** use the following syntax: `{resource_name}@{revision_id}`. For
example:

>     publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8

Author: This matches syntax used in git, perforce, and elsewhere, which makes it attractive.
I checked, and `@` does _not_ require URL-encoding.

Reviewer 2: We should be careful here. In GCS, for example, you might have a file with an @ sign in the name. It might be difficult to distinguish between an object called "foo@bar" and an object called "foo" at revision "bar".

Author: That is a really good point. For normal resource names, Hong wants to limit to DNS characters, but GCS is a really good example of a case where this may not hold up well.

It may still be a good system, but we would need a fallback for that use case if it were to arise.

Reviewer 2: That should be an appendix (sort of like how we have the alternatives for BatchGet)

Author: Sold, once I figure out what the alternative is.

Reviewer 3: FWIW, the GCS community tends to use `#` to indicate version.

Author: @sethvargo I would love to follow precedent here, but `#` has special meaning in URIs and probably can not work.

Author: Oh, I read @sethvargo's comment out of context. It probably _does_ make sense to use this as an alternative for situations like GCS where `@` can be in the filename.

Author: I added an appendix for this, intentionally avoiding being particularly opinionated.

Reviewer 4: Since there's no motivation or design doc here...

Why invent a new collection syntax for revisions rather than just use a normal nested collection?

APIs **should** generally accept a resource reference at a particular revision

> in any place where they ordinarily accept the resource name, except in

Reviewer 2: I think this is syaing "APIs **must not** accept revisions when modifying resources" ? Or no?

Author: Yes, I will make that more explicit.

Author: Done.

situations that mutate the resource.

**Important:** APIs **must not** require a revision ID, and **must** default to

> the current revision if one is not provided, except in methods specifically

Reviewer: Could a user set a default revision to not be the current revision? E.g. to set default to some known-to-be-stable version, and only edit the default once a new stable version is available?

I believe we would have a use-case for such a behavior.

Author: Discussed this in person, and we believe that https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/298/files#r329680161 implies here also.

dealing with the revision history (such as rollback) where failing to require
it would not make sense.

### Getting a revision

APIs implementing resource revisions **should** accept a resource name with a
revision ID in the standard `Get` method ([AIP-131][]):

```proto

> message GetBookRequest {

Author: I originally wrote this with:

```
message GetBookRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string revision_id = 2;
}
```

...but changed to the current variant in the process of researching and writing. I am only 60% convinced that this is better because it introduces a new "reserved character" (adding `@` to the existing list of `:` and `-`).

Author: The AutoML team told me today that this scales really well to a specific use case they have: child resources of a resource with revisions where the parent in that relationship is the resource _at a specific_ revision, e.g.

    models/foo@abcd1234/evaluations/*

Each evaluation only applies to the specific revision, and it is _desirable_ that a new model revision entails a "reset" of the evaluations.

Reviewer 2: Yes, decomposing this into two fields is the same as having shelf_id and book_id... I agree it should be a single semi-opaque string.

Reviewer: Agreed, @ functionality here is awesome.

  // The name of the book.
  //   Example: publishers/123/books/les-miserables
  //
  // In order to retrieve a previous revision of the book, also provide
  // the revision ID.
  //   Example: publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8
  string name = 1;
}
```

If the user passes a revision ID that does not exist, the API **must** fail
with a `NOT_FOUND` error.

### Listing revisions

APIs implementing resource revisions **should** provide a custom method for
listing the revision history for a resource, with a structure similar to
standard `List` methods ([AIP-132][]):

```proto
rpc ListBookRevisions(ListBookRevisionsRequest)
    returns (ListBookRevisionsResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {

>     get: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:listRevisions"

Author: Another possibility is `/revisions` rather than `:listRevisions`.
I think a custom verb is preferable, but I was not sure.

Author: Once I added the section for deleting revisions, it became very clear that `:listRevisions` is correct. (Otherwise `DeleteBook` and `DeleteBookRevision` would have identical URIs.)

  }
}
```

```proto
message ListBookRevisionsRequest {
  // The name of the book to list revisions for.

>   string name = 1;

Author: I went back and forth on whether to use `name` or `parent`.

Reviewer 5: I think name is clearer. We don't want to mix up hierarchy and revisions.

  // The maximum number of revisions to return per page.
  int32 page_size = 2;

  // The page token, received from a previous ListBookRevisions call.
  // Provide this to retrieve the subsequent page.
  string page_token = 3;
}

message ListBookRevisionsResponse {
  // The revisions of the book.

>   repeated BookRevision book_revisions = 1;

Author: Another way to do this would be `repeated Book book` which in many ways I prefer, but that makes reasoning about "when the revision was current" tougher, and makes revision metadata tougher also.

Reviewer: I would much prefer repeated Book book, and for any versioned resource require it to also contain revision_create_time field. Let's shave off one level of indirection.

Author: Changed.

  Book book = 1;

  // The date that this revision was created.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp create_time = 2;
}
```

- Revision objects **should** include a representation of the resource as of
  that revision.
  - The `string name` field in the resource **must** include an explicit
    revision ID.
  - If providing the full resource is expensive or infeasible, the revision
    object **may** include a `string name` field instead, which **must**
    include the resource name and an explicit revision ID.
- Revision objects **must** include the timestamp when the revision was
  created, which **should** be called `create_time`.
- Revision objects **may** include other information, such as a description or
  other metadata, if desired.

### Snapshotting revisions

Depending on the resource, different APIs may have different strategies for
when to snapshot a new revision, such as:

- Snapshot a new revision any time that there is a change
- Snapshot a new revision when something important happens
- Snapshot a new revision when the user specifically asks

APIs **may** use any of these strategies. APIs that want to snapshot a revision

> on user request **should** handle this with a `Snapshot` custom method:

Reviewer: I assume snapshot may also happen as a side-effect of different method. E.g. When a Model is created from a Dataset, then that Dataset can automatically be snapshotted at that moment.

Author: Yes (this counts as "something important happens").

> on user request **should** handle this with a `Snapshot` custom method:

Author: Might need to rename this because we have been using the term `Snapshot` to have another meaning.

Author: Changed to `Commit`.

  include the revision ID.

The request message **must** include the `name` field, and **may** include any
additional metadata about the revision (such as a description), which
**should** then be included in revision objects.

### Rollback

A common use case for a resource with a revision history is the ability to roll
back to a given revision. APIs **should** handle this with a `Rollback` custom
method:

```proto
rpc RollbackBook(RollbackBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:rollback"
    body: "*"
  }
}
```

- The method **must** use the `POST` HTTP verb.
- The method **should** return the resource, and the resource name **must**
  include the revision ID.

```proto
message RollbackBookRequest {
  // The book being rolled back.
  string name = 1;

  // The revision ID to roll back to.
  // It must be a revision of the same book.
  //
  //   Example: c7cfa2a8
  string revision_id = 2;
}
```

- The request message **must** include a `revision_id` field.
  - The API **must** fail the request with `NOT_FOUND` if the revision does not
    exist on that resource.

> **Note:** When rolling back, the API should return a _new_ revision of the

Author: This provision is debatable. This is how git works, and I think it is also useful to say that every revision is current for one and exactly one range of time, but it is slightly counter-intuitive to revert to one hash and then get back another.

Author: Nobody seems to want to actually debate this.

resource with a _new_ revision ID, rather than reusing the original ID. This
avoids problems with representing the same revision being active for multiple
ranges of time.

> 

Author: Note: Add a provision saying that `@` with no version means "latest, but return the name with the revision specifically included".

Author: Done.

> 

Author: Note: Prohibit more than one layer of revisioned hierarchy.

Author: Done, at should not.

[aip-131]: ./0131.md

> [aip-132]: ./0132.md

Reviewer: Couple more topics I feel should be covered here too:

1. Children of a versioned resource. 

a)
Can there be two types of children, 1st type always belongs to a specific version, 2nd type belongs to the resource as a whole (i.e. shared between versions). For 2nd type, e.g. a Book may have "titles in other languages", that do not change between versions.
b) For children of first type, when I GET one, how will I know afterwards to which parent version it belongs. What if it has 3 versioned ancestors (e.g. a word that would be a descendant of line, page, book all versioned). Would there e.g. need to be a custom method that from a resource name would tell me its parent versions (this is a rhetorical question for: we probably need something better). 
Maybe actually instead of having versioned resources have a revision_id field, it and all its descendants (that belong to specific version) should have revision_name. And then, e.g. for a word:

name: publishers/123/books/les-miserables/pages/200/lines/10/words/3
revision_name: publishers/123/books/les-miserables@aaaa/pages/200@bbb/lines/10@cccc/words/3
This way the knowledge of revision_id of ancestors properly propagates to children.

2. When I would like to list all children of all versions of a resource (e.g. Models have ModelEvaluations and I would like to find the ModelEvaluation with highest accuracy, and I don't know in which version it may be) then I would use "@-" to specify a list across all versions (and not the default version or some specific version). Note that then once I'll get such a ModelEvaluation I will right away be interested to which Model revision it belongs, and there the point 1 proposal helps.

3. Maybe in general more about creation of versioned resources, let me repeat an earlier comment:

Can CreateModel() create a totally new Model when no name is provided to it as argument, while if a name is provided it would just create a new version of an existing model? Or would you say it would be better to have 2 methods instead, e.g. CreateModel() and CreateModelVersion() (I don't like this option too much). This is in general for cases when new versions of a resource are created from a separate source, and not from the previous version (like new Model versions are created from a Dataset which is being tweaked).

Author: (1) and (2) are now included. Still need to write some language around `CreateModel`.

---
aip:
  id: 162
  state: draft
  created: 2019-09-17
permalink: /162
redirect_from:
  - /0162
---

# Resource Revisions

Some APIs need to have resources with a revision history, where users can
reason about the state of the resource over time. There are several reasons for
this:

- Users may want to be able to roll back to a previous revision, or diff
  against a previous revision.
- An API may create data which is derived in some way from a resource at a
  given point in time. In these cases, it may be desirable to snapshot the
  resource for reference later.

**Note:** We use the word _revision_ to refer to a historical reference for a
particular resource, and intentionally avoid the term _version_, which refers
to the version of an API as a whole.

## Guidance

APIs **may** store a revision history for a resource if it is useful to users.

APIs implementing resources with a revision history **must** provide a
`revision_id` field on the resource:

```proto
message Book {
  // The name of the book.
  string name = 1;

  // Other fields…

  // The revision ID of the book.

>   // A new revision is committed whenever the book is changed in any way.

Reviewer 5: It would be good to state the format within the comment, and include that as a "should".

Author: Done.

  string revision_id = 5 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = IMMUTABLE,
    (google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];

  // The timestamp that the revision was created.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp revision_create_time = 6
    [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];
}
```

- The resource **must** contain a `revision_id` field, which **should** be a
  string and contain a short, automatically-generated hash. A good rule of

>   thumb is the last eight characters of a UUID4.

Reviewer 6: What's the recommended approach in a world where tagging is a feature?
Using a UUID4 might lead to collisions or confusion as to whether it's a named tag or a revision_id.

>   - The `revision_id` field **must** document when new revisions are created

Reviewer 6: Can you document the reasons for not using an auto-incrementing integer?
I think that for users who have processes defined for moving from 1 version to another, it's useful to a revision value that is easy visually compare.

Author: The essential reason is that you get into weird cases when you delete revisions. I can document this on the AIP itself.

Author: Added

    (see [committing revisions](#committing-revisions) below).
- The resource **must** contain a `revision_create_time` field, which
  **should** be a `google.protobuf.Timestamp` (see [AIP-142][]).

### Referencing revisions

When it is necessary to refer to a specific revision of a resource, APIs
**must** use the following syntax: `{resource_name}@{revision_id}`. For
example:

    publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8

APIs **should** generally accept a resource reference at a particular revision
in any place where they ordinarily accept the resource name. However, they
**must not** accept a resource in situations that mutate the resource, and

> should error with `INVALID_ARGUMENT` if one is given.

Reviewer 5: Except that would be a fairly natural way of saying "Mutate this if it's latest, and fail otherwise". Like an etag, but more specific.

Author: I agree in principle, but I am nervous that this is a footgun. It is too easy for this to be implemented as in-place revision of a revision, which is scary and wrong.

it would not make sense (or lead to dangerous mistakes).

### Getting a revision

APIs implementing resource revisions **should** accept a resource name with a
revision ID in the standard `Get` method ([AIP-131][]):

```proto
message GetBookRequest {
  // The name of the book.
  //   Example: publishers/123/books/les-miserables
  //
  // In order to retrieve a previous revision of the book, also provide
  // the revision ID.
  //   Example: publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8
  string name = 1;
}
```

If the user passes a revision ID that does not exist, the API **must** fail
with a `NOT_FOUND` error.

APIs **must** return a `name` value corresponding to what the user sent. If the
user sent a name with no revision ID, the returned `name` string **must not**
include the revision ID either. Similarly, if the user sent a name with a
revision ID, the returned `name` string **must** explicitly include it.

APIs **should** allow users to specify a `@` with no revision ID to indicate
that the user wants the latest revision, but for the revision ID to be
explicitly included in the `name` field in the response:

>     publishers/123/books/les-miserables@

Reviewer 6: I think that that this should be an error because it can cause bugs to lead to odd behavior-- For example the code
${NAME}@${REVISION} would succeed even if revision is unset.

it's not clear to me that this is better than having a sentinel value or just dropping the "@" all together and erroring in this case.

Author: Convinced.

Author: Done.

    get: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:listRevisions"
  }
}
```

```proto
message ListBookRevisionsRequest {
  // The name of the book to list revisions for.
  string name = 1;

  // The maximum number of revisions to return per page.
  int32 page_size = 2;

  // The page token, received from a previous ListBookRevisions call.
  // Provide this to retrieve the subsequent page.
  string page_token = 3;
}

message ListBookRevisionsResponse {
  // The revisions of the book.
  repeated Book books = 1;

  // A token that can be sent as `page_token` to retrieve the next page.
  // If this field is omitted, there are no subsequent pages.
  string next_page_token = 2;
}
```

While revision listing methods are mostly similar to standard `List` methods
([AIP-132][]), the following important differences apply:

- The first field in the request message **must** be called `name` rather than
  `parent` (this is listing revisions for a specific book, not a collection of
  books).
- The URI **must** end with `:listRevisions`.
- Revisions **must** be ordered in reverse chronological order.
- The returned resources **must** include an explicit revision ID in the
  resource's `name` field.

>   - If providing the full resource is expensive or infeasible, the revision

Reviewer 5: The API **must** document that it will do this.

Author: Done.

parent revisions by accepting the `@-` syntax. For example:

    GET /v1/publishers/123/books/les-miserables@-/pages

APIs **should not** include multiple levels of resources with revisions, as
this quickly becomes difficult to reason about.

### Committing revisions

Depending on the resource, different APIs may have different strategies for
when to commit a new revision, such as:

- Commit a new revision any time that there is a change
- Commit a new revision when something important happens
- Commit a new revision when the user specifically asks

APIs **may** use any of these strategies. APIs that want to commit a revision
on user request **should** handle this with a `Commit` custom method:

```proto
rpc CommitBook(CommitBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:commit"
    body: "*"
  }
}
```

- The method **must** use the `POST` HTTP verb.
- The method **should** return the resource, and the resource name **must**
  include the revision ID.

The request message **must** include the `name` field, and **may** include any
additional metadata about the revision (such as a description), which

> **should** then be included in revision objects.

Reviewer 5: What are these "revision objects"? I don't think they're mentioned anywhere else.

Author: Fixed. We moved away from those.

  //
  //   Example: c7cfa2a8
  string revision_id = 2;
}
```

- The request message **must** include a `revision_id` field.
  - The API **must** fail the request with `NOT_FOUND` if the revision does not
    exist on that resource.

**Note:** When rolling back, the API should return a _new_ revision of the
resource with a _new_ revision ID, rather than reusing the original ID. This
avoids problems with representing the same revision being active for multiple
ranges of time.

### Deleting revisions

Revisions are sometimes expensive to store, and there are valid use cases to
want to remove one or more revisions from a resource's revision history.

APIs **may** define a method to delete revisions, with a structure similar to
`Delete` ([AIP-135][]) methods:

```proto
rpc DeleteBookRevision(DeleteBookRevisionRequest)
    returns (google.protobuf.Empty) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    delete: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:deleteRevision"
  }
}
```

```proto
message DeleteBookRevisionRequest {
  // The name of the book revision to be deleted, with a revision ID explicitly
  // included.
  //
  // Example: publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8
  string name = 1;
}
```

> - The explicit resource ID **must** be required (the method **must** fail with

Reviewer 5: Worth talking about a BatchDeleteBookRevisions custom method? There, it would make sense to specify a single name, but repeated revisions. If that seems reasonable, should it affect this case as well?

Author: I am inclined to wait until someone actually need this. Thoughts?
